the mathematician's misconception
all of our knowledge contains
misconceptions and necessary truth is
merely the subject matter of mathematics
not what we actually get as a result of
doing mathematics but perhaps you are
not convinced some mathematicians are
not they feel they have a sense as
perhaps you do
that there is a way of intuiting truth
simply knowing some things are actually
true that some things are self-evidently
the case and beyond all doubt merely
knowing something having a good
explanation
might not be enough for you
perhaps even having a proof is not
enough
what you want and what those
mathematicians think they need is
absolute pristine perfect mathematical
certainty
surely mathematics is prior to science
in some logical sense prior to physics
prior to the goings-on in neurons and it
is true there is a sense in which the
subject matter is it is independent of
physics or of our knowledge of physics
pythagoras theorem fermat's last theorem
girdles in completeness theorem all of
them are utterly unaffected by changes
in our theories of physics
however
our knowledge of any of them our
knowledge of the subject matter of
mathematics cannot be independent of
physics for what is known in mathematics
like everywhere else
depends on what it is possible for
matter like brains and computers to
actually do in order to construct
knowledge
and that includes proofs in mathematics
still you may resist the process of
proof in mathematics is not physical you
think it is set apart from everything
else
mathematicians may want to deny that
proof
which is how they reach some of their
conclusions
prove their theorems is not a physical
thing not a physical process but this
again confuses the subject matter and
the way we construct knowledge about
that subject matter
a proof is a process a physical process
that is completed by physical things
obeying physical laws
were the laws of physics different then
what could be proved would also be
different
intuition the apparent grasping of truth
or knowledge is something a mind does
so it is prone to error and incomplete
always
it cannot provide let alone be the final
word or some perfectly complete
statement
the idea that intuition and in
particular proof is not a physical
process has been named by david deutsch
the mathematician's misconception and
that brings together my previous two
episodes
in 2017 david shared the award of
something called the dirac medal for his
work in laying the foundations of
quantum computation proving the turing
thesis or the turing conjecture as it is
sometimes called incidentally there are
four separate awards in physics named in
honor of dirac david has so far been
awarded two of them
at the ceremony in 2017 he delivered an
insightful speech explaining the
misconception its history and his own
story in inventing the theory of quantum
computation all in about 20 minutes so
this is the six minute version of the
mathematician's misconception during
thesis proved by deutsche now more
broadly regarded as the church turing
deutsch principle governs all matter for
it is simply a consequence of the laws
of quantum physics as applied to
computing machines and all matter obeys
the laws of quantum physics proofs are
what mathematicians do and in order to
complete these proofs mathematicians use
their brains or other computers
there is nothing supernatural going on
there is no escaping the universal laws
of quantum theory it simply is provably
the case or physical processes can be
simulated by a universal computer in
particular a universal quantum computer
to arbitrary accuracy
and so conversely any physical process
is equivalent to or rather stands in
one-to-one correspondence with a quantum
computation
quantum computation therefore is the
deepest most accurate model of how all
physical processes occur and hence what
limits are placed upon such physical
processes all those parts of mathematics
thought to be utterly independent of
physics are not sure the abstract
objects themselves might be perfect
platonic solids do not exist in our
world only approximately so
geometric shapes that exist in 26
dimensions do not exist in the physical
world only the platonic abstract world
of pure mathematics of spaces of 26
dimensions which are not physical but
our knowledge of those things is
constrained by the physics here only
physics can reveal what proof
computation or information really are
and whether and to what extent something
like probability is real or not and how
accurate a description of physical
reality it is or not even if quantum
theory is overturned its successor will
still be a theory of physics not of pure
mathematics our knowledge of mathematics
is always limited by what the laws of
physics say those limits are in
particular what it is possible to prove
possible to compute
that is bound by what universal
computers here can do
and the church turing deutsch principle
underlies all laws of physics and all
matter including brains we simply cannot
know we've ever proved a necessary truth
even if mathematics is all about
necessary truth doubt must remain
but perhaps you are still skeptical
some things just seem impossible for you
to doubt
on this we can only say that your lack
of imagination on how you could possibly
be wrong is not itself a proof it does
not constitute a refutation of the
scientific and epistemological fact you
can always be an error your inability to
find an error in a proof does not itself
constitute a proof of infallibility it
may just indicate the opposite your
limitations as a fallible person
one's lack of imagination about how
something could not possibly be wrong
with a proof or has gone wrong with a
proof already is no proof
but even if it were all proofs of
physical anyway and subject to laws of
physics that mean nothing is ever
certain because the laws of physics
guarantee nothing except all matter must
obey them including your brain and mind